---
draft: false
title: >
    Where Water Meets Land: The Evolution of Boston’s Shoreline
publishDate: "2022-11-05 15:36"
author: "Kathryn Lasdow"
banner: "commonwealth--q524n559t"
---

import ItemCard from "@components/itemCard/itemCard.astro";


Boston is a city defined by its relationship to the shoreline. The
harbor that we know today, with its iconic wharves, aquarium, scenic
views, and ferry routes, is a product of centuries of geological and
human adaptation. Let's explore Boston's history of building in the
place where water meets land. 

<ItemCard id="commonwealth--q524n559t" />

## The Geology of the Shoreline 

Boston's topography was carved 2.5 million
years ago as glacial ice sheets eroded and sea levels rose. The melting
of those ice sheets left behind a small, 487-acre expanse known as the
Shawmut Peninsula, which was connected to the mainland by a small neck
of land. It was here that human inhabitants began to alter the landscape
to eventually comprise the footprint of the city we know today. 

<ItemCard id="commonwealth--3f463g094" />

Geologists who study the long evolution of Boston's waterfront refer to
the harbor as "Boston Basin." This watery, wedge-shaped curvature in the
Massachusetts coastline is ringed by surrounding hills and dotted with
drumlins\--compacted mounds that peak out above the water\--that
constitute the city's many harbor islands. Over the centuries,
Bostonians filled in the harbor and nearby rivers building man-made land
masses in areas that had once been water. 

## Indigenous Occupation and Colonial Adaptation

Indigenous inhabitants arrived on the Shawmut Peninsula approximately
12,000 years ago. Archaeologists have unearthed stone tools suggesting
indigenous groups camped on harborside hills and fished and gathered
shellfish in the shallow waters. Between 2,700 to 400 years ago,
indigenous peoples established permanent settlements. They grew corn on
the harbor islands and lived a more sedentary lifestyle in nearby
villages. Long before Europeans arrived in the 1500s, indigenous peoples
had already recognized the area's potential for fishing and farming. 

By the 1620s, English colonists settled on the Shawmut Peninsula, which
they renamed Boston in 1630. Over the course of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, civic leaders in Boston and elsewhere in the
colonies interpreted coastal topography as something to manipulate in
service of quick economic gain and as a place to build a variety of port
infrastructure. Skilled craftsmen and free and enslaved laborers tore
down nearby hills and used the dirt to fill in the harbor to create new
wharves, industries, and city blocks in areas that had once been water.
Building where water met land exposed the dynamic relationship between
the natural and manmade world.

## 19th Century Landmaking 

Throughout the 1800s, most land-making projects used a standard
technique. Workers built wooden or granite seawalls around the perimeter
of an area to be filled, usually in mudflats or low-lying areas that
were exposed at low tide. Once the perimeter had been laid, workers
dumped dirt, trash, or gravel inside until the fill reached the level of
high tide. As the nineteenth century progressed, builders eschewed
organic fill, such as mud or dredged materials, in favor of "clean"
fill, such as granite, thinking stones were more hygienic. Sometimes
workers reinforced the interior of the seawalls with wooden piles, meant
to provide additional support to the building foundations constructed on
top of the filled land. 

<ItemCard id="commonwealth--cn69mt66q" />

By the mid nineteenth century, the expansion of Boston's population and
its industries accelerated the need for more infrastructure and
shoreline land. Irish immigrants found work on the city's major landfill
projects, including the filling in of the Back Bay and South Cove, the
expansion of the Charlestown Docks, and the construction of the Fort
Point Channel. By the mid-1830s, railroads, rather than horse powered
wagons, hauled the fill that underlay Boston's newest neighborhoods. The
Boston and Worcester Railroad, the Old Colony Railroad, and the New York
and Boston Railroad carried gravel and granite from miles away to be
dumped into the coves, harbors, and marshlands along the shore. Steam
power also assisted workers in their efforts to build out Boston. By the
late 1880s, the city added hundreds of acres of manmade land to its
footprint. 

## 20th Century Industrial Expansion 

<ItemCard id="commonwealth--8p58pc98c" />

Boston continued to adapt its shoreline well into the twentieth century,
adding thousands of acres to its jurisdiction. These modern landfill
initiatives sought to connect the city to modern amenities, including
airports and highways. Beginning in the 1920s, the footprint for what
would become Logan Airport was built on a stretch of East Boston
mudflats. In the 1930s, the Sumner Tunnel connected East Boston to the
North End by way of a submerged roadway beneath the harbor. From the
1950s through the 2000s, the city created Dorchester's Columbia Point on
a trash heap, creating a modern peninsula topped with public housing and
a community health center, the University of Massachusetts Boston
campus, the JFK Presidential Library and Museum, and the Massachusetts
State Archives.

## The Waterfront Today 

Today, the evolution of Boston's shoreline continues. Since the 2000s,
the Rose Kennedy Greenway and the Harbor Walk have revitalized former
industrial areas into thriving recreational spots. However, alongside
this positive evolution, the city also confronts the challenges of
climate change, including the threats posed by rising sea levels,
erosion, and ongoing construction on made land. As Boston forges ahead,
it must navigate these issues to ensure the resilience and
sustainability of its shoreline for future generations. 

---

## Further Reading 

Robert Allison, *A Short History of Boston* (Commonwealth, 2004). 

Joseph M. Bagley, *A History of Boston in 50 Artifacts* (Brandeis
University Press, 2016).

Mark Peterson, *The City-State of Boston: The Rise and Fall of an
Atlantic Power, 1630-1865* (Princeton University Press, 2019). 

*The Atlas of Boston History,* ed. Nancy S. Seasholes (University of
Chicago Press, 2019). 

Nancy S. Seasholes, *Gaining Ground: A History of Landmaking in Boston*
(MIT Press, 2003). 

Dan Tobyne, *Urban Archaeology Boston: Discovering the Hidden History in
Plain Sight* (Down East Books, 2019).

